 Bhai Chhoto Bou 

Today we will reach a place called Aden and touch land again after a long time. But we cannot disembark, in case we pic up some contagious disease. On arrival in Aden we have to change ship, which will be a big voter. I cannot tell you how seasick I have been this time– for three days, whatever I swallowed just came up again, my head felt dizzy and the rest of me was in turmoil— I even wondered whether I would pull through. On Sunday night I distinctly felt my self leave my body and go to Jorasanko. You were lying on one side of the big bed, Belt and Khoka beside you. I caressed you al little and said, “little wife, remember this Sunday night when I left my body and came to see you — when i return from Europe I shall ask you if you saw me”.  Then i kissed Beli and Khoka and came back. When i was ill did you ever think of me? I became restless thinking of seeing you again. Nowadays I feel constantly that there is no place like home — this time when I get back I shall not stir out any more.
Today I had my first bath for a week. But baths here are not a pleasure; the salt in the seawater makes the whole body sticky and my hair becomes matted and horribly glued together — it is an odd sensation. i think I shall avoid bathing until I leave the ship. it will be another week before we reach Europe — when we get there, I shall be glad to set foot on land. I have had enough of the ocean day and night. But at present the sea is pretty calm, the ship hardly rolls, and I am no longer sick. All day i lie on deck a long chair and either chat with Loken, ponder, or read a book. At night too, we make our beds on deck and avoid entering our cabins if possible.  Going inside the cabin makes you feel queasy. Last night, though, fit suddenly rained — we had to drag our bedding to a place where the rain could not get at us. since then it has not stopped raining, after being fine and sunny yesterday. On board there are some little girls, whose mother has died and whose father is taking them to England. when I look at them I feel pity. there after goes everywhere with them, but he doesn’t know how to dress them proper or how to look after them. when they go out in the rain and he warns them no to, “they tell him we like going out in the rain” — which makes him laugh a bit; seeing them happily playing in the rain he cannot bring himself to stop them. to look at them reminds me of my own babies. last night I dreamt of Beli — she had come on board the steamer, and she looked lovelier than i can say. you must tell me what sort of thing i should bring them when i return home. if you answer this letter immediately, i might receive your reply while i am in England. remember that Tuesday is the day of mailing to England. give the children lots of kisses from me — and have yourself too.
Sri Ravindranath Tagore
